
This presentation shows some experiments on AFX file format I stored 
beforehand in some BLOCKS and a few definitions that play them through 
built-in AY-3-8912 chip.


------
  01
------   

Sinclair ZX Spectrum Next has three AY-3-8912 chips and being mostly backward 
compatible this allows us to reuse many of the pre-existing applications and 
routines to play sound effects and music.

Each AY chip has 3 sound channels, called A, B and C. This makes 9 total.
One AY chip can be controlled using 14 registers using normal Z80 I/O port  
$FFFD to select register and $BFFD to write the value.
Registers allow us to decide the tone-pitch, the white-noise-period, the volume
and envelope.

At  <https://shiru.untergrund.net/software.shtml#old> I found an "AY Sound 
FX Editor" that introduced me to the .afx file format.

This depicts a single channel sound format that describe frame by frame 
a single sound effect. One frame is 1/50th of second.

The site provides a Z80 machine code routine capable to play such a format
I ported within the vForth environment and extended to use all 9 channels.


------
  02
------   

I found some hundred of Spectrum game effects and I wrote some definition

    LOAD2BLOCK 
    
that loads a small .afx file to a single BLOCK to to have it easily available.

Single effect, file extension .afx 

Every frame encoded with a flag byte and a number of bytes, 
which is vary depending from value change flags. 
 
 bit0..3  Volume
 bit4     Disable T
 bit5     Change Tone
 bit6     Change Noise
 bit7     Disable N

When the bit5 set, two bytes with tone period will follow; 
when the bit6 set, a single byte with noise period will follow; 
when both bits are set, first two bytes of tone period, then single byte with noise period will follow. 
When none of the bits are set, next flags byte will follow. 
End of the effect is marked with byte sequence #D0, #20. 
Player should detect it before outputting it to the AY registers, 
by checking noise period value to be equal #20. 
The editor considers last non-zero volume value as the last frame of an effect, 
other parameters aren't matter. 

Effects bank, file extension .afb 

Header: 
+0 (1 byte) Total number of effects in the bank, up to 256 (0 means 256);
+1 (2 bytes per effect) Table of offsets to data of every effect. 
Offset value is given relative to the second byte of the offset itself, 
this allows to calculate absolute address very fast: 
   hl=offset in the effects table
   ld c,(hl)
   inc hl
   ld b,(hl)
   add hl,bc
   hl=absolute address of effect data
Data: 

+n (m bytes) The effects data, format is the same as in the single effect file. 
After every effect there could be a null terminated text string with name of the effect. 
It may absent, if the bank was saved into a file using corresponding item of the File menu, 
in this case null terminator bytes are absent as well. 


------
  03
------   


I then defined a loop though all these BLOCKS to read them to RAM that is
keep them in six BUFFERs, and play them using six voices unison.

For example 2203 LIST that is blocks 4406 and 7

2350 LOAD    loads the  AY-DEMO  definitions.

2351 LOAD    to show some echo effect


